---
title: Hi, I'm Harish Narayanan
description: Dr. Harish Narayanan is a London-based applied mathematician, computational biologist and maker of fine web applications.
---

I'm a London-based co-parent to [two adorable
boys](https://narayanan.co). I'm [trained in scientific
computing](/research/) and make [beautiful things on the
web](/projects/) for a living.

## Professionally... üßë‚Äçüíª

I'm one of the founders of a fintech startup[^1] called
[Edgefolio](https://edgefolio.com/). In this setting, I spend a lot of
time thinking about what the *right things* to build are, and growing
teams to build these things.

When I'm not on the job, I'm always eager to [explore new
possibilities](/projects/). I take on exploratory projects that align
with my passion for using innovative technologies to make the world a
better place.

Right now, I'm working on two projects that reflect this passion. The
first is called [Scancer](https://scancer.org/about/), which is all
about making early detection of breast cancer more accessible. The
second project is [HERO Index](http://www.heroindex.io), a platform
that assists you in investing based on your personal values. Both of
these projects rely on recent AI[^2] technology to solve problems that
were once impossible for computers to tackle.

I'm also delving deeper into some fascinating ideas involving using
neural networks to solve differential equations. It's a highly
efficient method that has the potential to revolutionise the way we
design and control systems in challenging fields like biomedicine and
energy.

Although I'm still in the early stages and have only been doing a lot
of doodling on paper, I'm incredibly excited about this work and would
love to make it my life's focus.

If any of this stuff is exciting to you too, do check out [more of my
projects](/projects) and [get in
touch](mailto:mail@harishnarayanan.org)!

## Personally... üòª

I'm very into music (I love to sing! üé§), and I'm internet famous[^3] for a
tool I made some years ago called
[Shpotify](https://github.com/hnarayanan/shpotify). Shpotify lets you
control the music app Spotify from the command line on a Mac. Yes, I
am a bit of a nerd.

I also love taking photos (who doesn't?) and publish some of it
online. More recently, I've been toying with AI models to style images
and generate art. I very much enjoy programmatically generating
thousands of different variants and hand-selecting a bunch to form
collections.

As I get older, I find myself valuing connecting with and
helping people more and more. Whether it's spending time with my
children, volunteering, mentoring students, or supporting kids at an
orphanage in my hometown, I'm always looking for ways to make a
positive impact.

I've been on a journey of growth and healing since my marriage ended,
and it's empowered me in so many ways. Now, I'm feeling creative,
energised, and excited to [find my forever person](/date-me/). ‚ù§Ô∏è
TODO: Textually, Journalling, Writing/ES

Wow, we've covered *a lot* of ground. Thank you for sticking around.
If you'd like to get to know me personally, you can [read 
more](/date-me/), or even better, let's go on a date! If you think you
might be intereted in working with me, please do check out [more of my
projects](/projects/). Either way, please don't hesitate to reach out.
I'm excited to get to know you too.


[^1]: I say "startup," but it's over ten years old now and standing on
    its own feet! üí´
[^2]: Convolutional neural networks and large transformer models,
    respectively.
[^3]: This tool that I first built in a weekend has like tens of
    thousands of downloads, whereas my Ph.D. thesis that took 5 years
    to write has maybe been read by 5 people. *Including me.*
