---
title: Date Me
description: I am excited to get to know you.
---

Hello! Thank you so much for stopping by and getting to know me.

My name is Harish and I'm a 43-year-old man. I live in North London
with my [two adorable young boys](https://narayanan.co) who I care for
part time. I'm a kind and genuine person with a lot of life
experience, including a failed marriage. After quite some healing, I
feel like I am in a good, creative place, and have the enthusiasm to
find my forever person. ☺️

</div>

<div class="pure-g l-box-container-full-width">
  <div class="pure-u-xl-1-8 pure-hidden-md">
  </div>
  <div class="pure-u-xl-1-4 pure-u-md-1-3 pure-u-sm-1-2">
    <div class="l-box">
        <img class="pure-img" src="/images/date-me/harish-and-oscar.jpg" alt="Oscar on Harish's shoulders">
     </div>
  </div>
  <div class="pure-u-xl-1-4 pure-u-md-1-3 pure-u-sm-1-2">
    <div class="l-box">
        <img class="pure-img" src="/images/date-me/harish-on-his-sofa.jpg" alt="Harish on his sofa">
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="pure-u-xl-1-4 pure-u-md-1-3 pure-hidden-sm">
    <div class="l-box">
        <img class="pure-img" src="/images/date-me/harish-and-hugo.jpg" alt="Harish and Hugo at a fair">
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="pure-u-xl-1-8 pure-hidden-md">
  </div>
</div>

<div class="container">

As a self-proclaimed nerd, I've [studied a lot](/research/) and make a
living [making silly things on the web](/projects/). I do some of this
in the context of a [company I co-created](https://edgefolio.com/),
and it's going surprisingly well after years of toil. 💫

I am looking for a deep and lifelong relationship with a woman (30+,
either cis or trans). I am especially drawn to gentle and creative
people, and I have a dream where I make [cute and
meaningful](/projects/) things with my partner as we go through life.
I also fantasise about singing together 🎤, as it is something that
gives me a lot of joy.

I'm a thoughtful and introspective person who thrives in intimate
settings rather than bustling social environments. Although I've
struggled with social anxiety and depression in the past, I've made
significant progress in my personal growth through therapy,
[journaling](https://hachyderm.io/@harish/110007235998489508) and
self-reflection. My journey has taught me to be a more compassionate
and empathetic person, and I'm proud of the individual I've become
today. 🙏

I've been a lifelong vegetarian 🥕 for cultural reasons, and I tend
vegan on some days just by happenstance. I believe we would have even
more in common if you were vegetarian too, but please know that it's
not a requirement for us to be a good match.

</div>

<div class="pure-g l-box-container-full-width">
  <div class="pure-u-xl-1-8 pure-hidden-md">
  </div>
  <div class="pure-u-xl-1-4 pure-u-md-1-3 pure-u-sm-1-2">
    <div class="l-box">
        <img class="pure-img" src="/images/date-me/harish-at-a-pub.jpg" alt="Harish at a pub">
     </div>
  </div>
  <div class="pure-u-xl-1-4 pure-u-md-1-3 pure-u-sm-1-2">
    <div class="l-box">
        <img class="pure-img" src="/images/date-me/harish-and-oscar-2.jpg" alt="Harish and Oscar">
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="pure-u-xl-1-4 pure-u-md-1-3 pure-hidden-sm">
    <div class="l-box">
        <img class="pure-img" src="/images/date-me/harish-at-a-park.jpg" alt="Harish at park">
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="pure-u-xl-1-8 pure-hidden-md">
  </div>
</div>

<div class="container">

As a father, I prioritise being affectionate and fully engaged with my
children. 👨‍👦‍👦 While I'm not sure I have the stamina to raise any more
biological children at my age, I would absolutely love to support and
care for any little ones you may already have.

And with that, thank you for taking the time to read through this
page! 🤗

If you feel that we could be a good match, please [write to
me](mailto:mail@harishnarayanan.org). While I am searching for a
romantic partner, I'm also open to forming meaningful connections of
all kinds. I am excited to get to know you.
