---
date: 2004-06-01
title: Modelling tissue growth and development
short_title: Tissue growth and development
thumbnail: /images/research/continuum-biophysics/constricted-ecf-flow.png
description: A continuum theory of multiphase mixtures for modelling biological growth.
category: primary
featured: yes
start_date: 2002
end_date: 2007
includes_video: yes
---

This piece summarises aspects of the work that went into my
Ph.D. dissertation. If you're interested in more details, head on over
to my more [formal research writing](/research/#writing).

## Introduction

There is a lot of compelling clinical evidence that suggests the
pervasive influence of mechanical factors in biological growth. The
central goal of this modelling work is to gain a deeper understanding
of the biophysical bases underlying these influences.

The utility of the resulting mathematical and computational framework
extends across disciplines by helping steer and interpret experimental
work, both under physiological and pathological cases of interest. Our
initial focus is directed toward a better understanding of the
mechanics of growing soft tissue, specifically tendon.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/one-construct.jpg" title="Our biological model: My colleague Sarahâ€™s engineered tendon constructs." >}}

## General formulation for growth in tissues

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/tissue-continuum.png" title="The tissue as a continuum potato." extra-class="add-background" >}}

_Growth_ in biological tissue is a direct outcome of cascades of
complex, intracellular, biochemical reactions involving numerous
species, their diffusion across cell membranes, and transport through
the extra-cellular matrix. Both reaction and diffusion/transport are
influenced by mechanics in a number of ways. Our modelling effort
proposes a general continuum field formulation for growth capable of
simulating this rich observed behaviour, and proceeds to specialise it
incorporating different modelling assumptions---such as the use of an
enzyme kinetics-based growth law---to better represent cases of
interest.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/enzyme-kinetics.png" title="Enzyme kinetics-based growth law." extra-class="add-background" >}}

Recognising that a growing tissue is an open system undergoing
irreversible thermodynamics, the model incorporates the physics of
multi-phase reacting systems, and deduces balance laws and a
constitutive framework obeying the Second Law of Thermodynamics.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/balance-laws.png" title="Reference configuration statements of the balance of mass and momenta for all species." extra-class="add-background" >}}

Notably, the transport of the extracellular fluid relative to the
matrix is shown to be driven by the gradients of stress, concentration
and chemical potential---a coupling of mass transport and mechanics
that emerges directly.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/driving-force.png" title="A constitutive relationship relating the fluid flux to various driving forces." extra-class="add-background" >}}

Assumptions central to existing mechanics theories, such as the nature
of the split of deformation maps across the different species
involved, and those on momentum transfers between interacting species,
are revisited, analysed and carefully revised in cases where they
limit the biophysical correctness of predicted growth phenomena.

Coupled, non-linear partial differential equations arise from the
theory to describe the complex physics. These differential equations
are solved using a finite element scheme based on _operator-splits_;
incorporating non-linear projection methods to treat
incompressibility, energy-momentum conserving algorithms for dynamics,
and mixed methods for stress gradient-driven fluxes.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/mesh.png" title="A representative mesh used in the finite element calculations." extra-class="add-background" >}}

One highlight of the numerical methods is a rigorous treatment of
numerical stability issues that arise with any operator-splitting
scheme. This analysis is critical to the ability to distinguish
physical instabilities, such as unbounded growth of tumours, from
those that are artifacts of the numerical methods. Another key feature
is the reformulation of the reaction-transport equations to embed the
incompressibility constraint on the fluid phase, enabling a
straightforward implementation of numerical stabilisation in the
advection-dominated limit.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/stabilisable-form.png" title="The solute transport equation in classical, stabilisable form." extra-class="add-background" >}}

## Mechanics of growing tissue

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/growth-kinematics.png" title="The kinematics of growth." extra-class="add-background" >}}

Using model geometries and imposing classes of initial and boundary
conditions approximating experiments in our laboratory, the
computational framework developed is used to demonstrate aspects of
the coupled phenomena as the tissue grows. In these foundational
calculations, only two phases---fluid and collagen---are included. The
collagen phase is modelled by the anisotropic worm-like chain model,
and the fluid phase is modelled as ideal and nearly
incompressible. The interconversion between these two phases is
modelled using first-order chemical kinetics.

For a tissue undergoing finite strains, the transport equations can be
formulated, mathematically, in terms of quantities with respect to
either the reference or current (deformed) configuration. However, the
physics of fluid-tissue interactions, and the imposition of relevant
boundary conditions, is best understood and represented in the current
configuration.

{{< video src="OzXqCeOc2qM" width="720" height="540" title="Unbounded build-up of fluid due to the (unphysical) specification of constant reference fluid concentration boundary conditions, while attempting to simulate a loaded tendon immersed in a bath." >}}

When a tendon having an initially-uniform distribution of collagen is
immersed into a nutrient-rich bath, nutrient-rich fluid is transported
into the tissue, and growth occurs due to the formation of additional
collagen.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/swell-after-growth.png" title="Distribution of collagen after growth." extra-class="add-background" >}}

{{< video src="J9bB_R0KIew" width="720" height="540" title="The collagen concentration increases over half-an-hour as the infusing nutrient-rich fluid causes the tendon to grow." >}}

There is a rapid, fluid transport-dominated swelling of the tendon
initially as it is immersed into the fluid bath. This is followed by a
slower, reaction-driven growth phase.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/swell-volume-evolution.png" title="Rapid swelling of a tendon immersed in a bath." extra-class="add-background" >}}

{{< video src="3VMCupM3BCk" width="720" height="540" title="Pay close attention to observe the initial, fluid transport-dominated swelling of the tissue, followed by much slower reaction-driven growth." >}}

On performing a uniaxial tension test on the tendon before and after
growth, it is observed that the grown tissue---having a higher
concentration of collagen---is stiffer and stronger; which is in
accordance with experiment.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/swell-growth-mechanics.png" title="The grown tissue is stiffer and stronger." extra-class="add-background" >}}

Upon subjecting the tendon to a load-unload cycle, a stress-strain
curve characteristic of viscoelastic tissue is observed. Here, the
area between the loading and unloading paths is the hysteretic energy
loss due to viscous dissipation.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/tendon-viscoelasticity.png" title="Viscoelastic effects observed in the model." extra-class="add-background" >}}

{{< video src="uyo_AAP70kY" width="720" height="540" title="Observe the induced fluid flow as the tendon is subjected to a cyclically varying load. Friction between the solid and fluid phases results in energy dissipation." >}}

Qualitatively, this viscoelastic behaviour compares favourably with
our corresponding experimental tests on two-week-old tibialis anterior
tendons in the laboratory.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/hysteresis-experiment.png" title="Hysteresis observed in experiments on tibialis anterior tendons." extra-class="add-background" >}}

Application of a constrictive radial load---where the maximum strain
in the radial direction is experienced half-way through the height of
the tendon---to a tendon immersed in a fluid-filled bath results in a
stress-gradient induced fluid flux. This drives fluid away from the
central plane.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/constrict-vertical-flux.png" title="Vertical fluid flux in a constricted tendon." extra-class="add-background" >}}

{{< video src="RRT20euEX58" width="720" height="540" title="The constrictive radial load sets up a fluid flux in the vertical direction, driving fluid away from the central plane toward the top and bottom faces of the tendon." >}}

This pressure wave set up in the fluid travels toward the top and
bottom faces, and as the fluid leaves these surfaces, we observe that
the tendon relaxes.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/constrict-top-face-displacement.png" title="Relaxation of the top face of a constricted tendon." extra-class="add-background" >}}

{{< video src="jN0t7GBcvnc" width="720" height="540" title="The stress gradient-driven fluid flux causes a decrease in the reference fluid concentration near the central plane. Pay close attention to observe the relaxation of the top face as the fluid leaves the surface." >}}

## Drug delivery and wound healing

Having established the fundamental behaviour of the formulation, we
now turn to more sophisticated applications.

In order to model localised, bolus delivery of regulatory chemicals to
the tendon while accounting for mechanical effects, we introduce
additional species: a solute, and a distribution of fibroblasts that
are characterised by their cell concentration. Both concentration
gradient-driven mass transport and stress gradient-driven fluid flow
are incorporated into this illustration, which demonstrates the use of
the formulation in studying the efficacy of drug delivery
mechanisms. Michaelis-Menten enzyme kinetics is used to determine the
rates of solute consumption and, consequently, collagen production.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/michaelis-menten.png" title="Michaelis-Menten enzyme kinetics." extra-class="add-background" >}}

In addition to subjecting the tendon immersed in the bath to the
constrictive radial load described earlier, a solute-rich bulb with
its centre on the axis of the tendon is introduced. The relatively
small magnitude of the fluid mobility---with respect to the diffusion
coefficient for the solute through the fluid---results in a relatively
small stress gradient-driven flux, and the transport of the solute is
diffusion dominated. Consequently, as time progresses, the solute
primarily diffuses locally, and as the solute concentration in a
region increases, the enzyme-kinetics model predicts a small source
term for collagen, and we observe nominal growth.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/medicate-solute-concentration.png" title="Collagen growth localised to regions of medication." extra-class="add-background" >}}

The following computation demonstrates the capability of the
formulation in studying the self-healing of damaged
tissue. Incorporating a cell-signalling parameter into the chemical
kinetics, the formation of collagen is spatially biased toward damaged
regions of the tissue.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/damage-healing-source.png" title="Chemical kinetics with a damage-healing parameter." extra-class="add-background" >}}

Turning to damaged skin as our tissue of interest, we begin by
delineating the damaged regions---characterised by a sudden reduction
in the concentration of collagen---from the rest of the tissue.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/damaged-region.png" title="Damaged region of skin demarcated by green." extra-class="add-background" >}}

This damaged tissue is introduced to a nutrient-rich environment, and
the cell-signalling parameter induces preferential growth in these
damaged regions. We allow this healing process to evolve under two
different conditions---under no load and under uniaxial stress---to
study the influence of mechanics on the properties of healed tissue.

The anisotropic nature of these tissues arises from the
microstructural alignment of their constituent collagen fibers, and
the directionality of newly-deposited fibers are determined by the
eigenvectors of the applied stress field. When the healing process is
carried out under uniaxial stress, with the orientation of the stress
being defined by the initially-stiff directionality of the tissue, the
newly-deposited collagen has anisotropic properties which are
identical to collagen in the undamaged tissue. This results in a
healed tissue indistinguishable from the undamaged tissue.

However, when the healing process is carried out under no load, the
newly-deposited collagen consists of arbitrarily-directed fibers,
resulting in a formation of isotropic tissue in the damaged regions as
the tissue heals. This results in a healed tissue being more compliant
than the undamaged tissue along the originally-stiff direction of the
tissue. Thus, upon being subjected to a load, these compliant healed
regions experience a reduced stress.

{{< figure src="/images/research/continuum-biophysics/damaged-vertical-stress.png" title="Vertical stress in skin recovering from damage." extra-class="add-background" >}}

This result is analogous to the experimentally observed hypertrophic
scarring of skin as it recovers from damage under no applied load.

[hyperelastic]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperelastic_material
